Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-10925-9


Artifcial intelligence in online higher education: 
A systematic review of empirical research from 2011 
to 2020

Fan Ouyang1    · Luyi Zheng1 · Pengcheng Jiao2

Received: 5 October 2021 / Accepted: 27 January 2022 / Published online: 26 February 2022 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 
2022

Abstract
As online learning has been widely adopted in higher education in recent years, arti-
fcial intelligence (AI) has brought new ways for improving instruction and learning 
in online higher education. However, there is a lack of literature reviews that focuses 
on the functions, efects, and implications of applying AI in the online higher edu-
cation context. In addition, what AI algorithms are commonly used and how they 
infuence online higher education remain unclear. To fll these gaps, this system-
atic review provides an overview of empirical research on the applications of AI in 
online higher education. Specifcally, this literature review examines the functions 
of AI in empirical researches, the algorithms used in empirical researches and the 
efects and implications generated by empirical research. According to the screen-
ing criteria, out of the 434 initially identifed articles for the period between 2011 
and 2020, 32 articles are included for the fnal synthesis. Results fnd that: (1) the 
functions of AI applications in online higher education include prediction of learn-
ing status, performance or satisfaction, resource recommendation, automatic assess-
ment, and improvement of learning experience; (2) traditional AI technologies are 
commonly adopted while more advanced techniques (e.g., genetic algorithm, deep 
learning) are rarely used yet; and (3) efects generated by AI applications include a 
high quality of AI-enabled prediction with multiple input variables, a high quality 
of AI-enabled recommendations based on student characteristics, an improvement 
of students’ academic performance, and an improvement of online engagement and 
participation. This systematic review proposes the following theoretical, technologi-
cal, and practical implications: (1) the integration of educational and learning theo-
ries into AI-enabled online learning; (2) the adoption of advanced AI technologies 
to collect and analyze real-time process data; and (3) the implementation of more 
empirical research to test actual efects of AI applications in online higher education.

Keywords  Artifcial Intelligence in Education · Systematic review · Online higher 
education · Online learning · Empirical research

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

                                                         Vol.:(0123456789)1 3
7894                           Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

1 Introduction

Advances in the Internet, wireless communication, and computing technologies 
have shed light on educational changes in online higher education, particularly 
the application of Artifcial Intelligence in Education (AIEd) in recent years 
(Chen et al., 2020a, b; Ouyang & Jiao, 2021). Online and distance learning refers 
to delivering lectures, virtual classroom meetings, and other teaching materials 
and activities via the Internet (Harasim, 2000; Holmberg, 2005). This educa-
tional model has been extensively integrated into higher education to transform 
instruction and learning modes as well as provide fair educational opportunities 
to online learners (Hu, 2021; Liu et al., 2020; Mubarak et al., 2020; Yang et al., 
2014). In the online education context, AI applications (e.g. intelligent tutoring 
systems, teaching robots, learning analytics dashboards, adaptive learning sys-
tems) have been used to promote online students’ learning experience, perfor-
mance, and quality (Chen et al., 2020a, b; Hinojo-Lucena et al., 2019). Varied 
AIEd techniques (e.g., natural language processing, artifcial neural networks, 
machine learning, deep learning, genetic algorithm) have been implemented to 
create intelligent learning environments for behavior detection, prediction model 
building, learning recommendation, etc. (Chen et  al., 2020a, b; Rowe, 2019). 
Overall, the applications of AI systems and technologies have transformed online 
higher education and have provided opportunities and challenges for improving 
higher education quality. Previous reviews have provided substantial insight into 
the AIEd feld. For instance, existing review work has summarized the trends 
of AIEd (Tang et  al., 2021; Xie et  al., 2019; Zhai et  al., 2021), applications 
(Alyahyan & Düştegör, 2020; Hooshyar et al., 2016; Liz-Domínguez et al., 2019; 
Shahiri et al., 2015), theoretical paradigms (Ouyang & Jiao, 2021) and AI roles in 
education ( Xu & Ouyang, 2021). However, there is limited literature reviews that 
examine the purposes and efects of applying AI techniques in the online higher 
education context. More important, a major challenge is to gain a deep under-
standing of the empirical efect of AI applications in online higher education. To 
achieve this purpose, this systematic review collects, reviews, and summarizes 
the empirical research of AI in online higher education with particular aims to 
analyze the application purposes, the AI algorithms used, and efects of AI tech-
niques generated in online higher education.


2  Literature  review

AIEd refers to the use of AI technologies or applications in educational settings 
to facilitate instruction, learning, and decision making processes of stakeholders, 
such as students, instructors, and administrators (Hwang et al., 2020). In online 
higher education, AI can support instructional design and development by pro-
viding automatic learning resources or paths (Christudas et  al., 2018), ofering 
automatic assessments (Aluthman, 2016) or predictions of student performance 

1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925         7895

(Almeda et al., 2018; Moreno-Marcos et al., 2019). From the instructional per-
spective, AI can play the role as a tutor to observe students’ learning processes, 
analyze their learning performances, and provide chances for instructors to get 
rid of repetitive and tedious teaching tasks (Chen et al., 2020a, b; Hwang et al., 
2020). Moreover, from the learner perspective, One of the crucial objectives of 
AIEd is to providing personalized learning guidance or support based on stu-
dents’ learning status, preferences, or personal characteristics (Hwang et  al., 
2020). For instance, AIEd can provide learning materials or paths based on stu-
dents’ needs (Christudas et al., 2018), diagnose students’ strengths, weaknesses, 
or knowledge gaps (Liu et  al., 2017), or provide automated feedback and pro-
moting collaboration between students (Aluthman, 2016; Benhamdi et al., 2017; 
Zawacki-Richter et al., 2019). Furthermore, AIEd can help educational adminis-
trators make decisions about course development, pedagogical design and aca-
demic transformation. For example, AI algorithm models can mine and analyze 
available educational data from higher education system database to understand 
course status, student learning performance, which can help administrators or 
decision-makers to make changes needed in the course (George & Lal, 2019). In 
summary, AI-enhanced technology has played an essential role in education from 
the instructor, learner and administrator perspectives, with its potential to open 
new opportunities and challenges for higher education transformation.
  Multiple AI algorithms have been applied in higher education to facilitate auto-
matic recommendation, academic prediction, or assessment. For example, Sequen-
tial Pattern Mining (SPM) has been utilized in recommender systems for capturing 
historical learning sequence patterns in learner interactions with the system and dis-
covering suitable recommendation items for learners’ learning sequences (Romero 
et al., 2013a). Evolutionary algorithms such as Genetic Algorithms (GA), Particle 
Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) have been used 
for learning content optimization (Christudas et al., 2018). Machine Learning (ML) 
has been used in academic prediction, such as predicting the academic success of 
students in online courses, whether students would successfully complete their col-
lege degree, or predict students’ selection of courses in higher education (Rico-Juan 
et  al. 2019). Lykourentzou et  al. (2009) used three machine learning techniques, 
namely feed-forward neural networks, support vector machines and probabilistic 
ensemble simplifed fuzzy ARTMAP to predict dropout-prone students in early 
stages of the e-learning course. Moseley and Mead (2008) used a machine learning 
technique called decision trees to predict student attrition in higher educational nurs-
ing institutions. Natural language processing (NLP) has been used for code detection 
or emotional analysis. For example, Rico-Juan et al. (2019) adopted NLP for auto-
matic detection of inconsistencies between numerical scores and textual feedback 
in peer-assessment process. In summary, diferent AI algorithms have been used in 
AIEd to achieve automatic recommendation, academic prediction, or assessment 
functions in order to improve instruction and learning quality.
  Although there are existing systematic reviews on AIEd (e.g., AIEd trends, 
paradigms, tools, or applications) (Ouyang & Jiao, 2021; Tang et al., 2021), there 
is an inadequacy of review work examining AIEd in the higher education con-
text. Among a collection of 37 AIEd review articles published between 2011 and 
                                                              1 3
7896                           Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925


xistingFig. 1   Theliterature e  review of AIEd

2021, only 6 review articles focus on higher education, published in the years 
of 2019 and 2020 (see Fig. 1). Among those six review articles, Hinojo-Lucena 
et  al. (2019) used the bibliometric method to review the applications of AI in 
higher education. This review analyzed the number of authors, main source titles, 
organizations, authors, and countries of AIEd in higher education. Zawacki-Rich-
ter et  al. (2019) synthesized 146 articles about the application of AI in higher 
education and concluded four major areas, namely profling and prediction, intel-
ligent tutoring systems, assessment, and evaluation, as well as adaptive learning 
systems. However, this review work did not conduct further analysis for examin-
ing the efects of AI in online higher education. Moreno-Marcos et  al. (2018) 
used a systematic literature review to examine the AI models used for perfor-
mance prediction in MOOCs. This review found that AI algorithms used for pre-
diction were: regression, support vector machines (SVM), decision trees (DTs), 
random forest (RF), naive Bayes (NB), gradient boosting machine (GBM), neu-
ral networks (NN), etc. We concluded that existing literature review work mainly 
focuses on the application of AIEd in general, and few work specifcally focuses 
on the online higher education. Among those work that focus on AI in online 
higher education, they mainly focus on describing the applications of AI in a spe-
cifc educational context (e.g., MOOCs), which resulted in the lack of a holis-
tic picture of the AIEd trends, categorizations, and applications in online higher 
education.
  As an efort to further understand AI in online higher education, this systematic 
review examines empirical research of AI applications in online higher education 
from the instructional and learning perspective and investigates the functions of AI 
applications, algorithms used, and the efects of AI on the instruction and learning 
process within online higher education. To be specifc, this review focuses on the 
following three research questions:

1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925         7897

  RQ1: What are the functions of AI applications in online higher education?
  RQ2: What AI algorithms are used to achieve those functions in online higher 
  education?
  RQ3: What are the efects and implications of AI applications on the instruction 
  and learning processes in online higher education?


3  Methodology

The systematic review methodology used in this study is based on the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) principles, 
which consists of a 27-item checklist and a four-phase fow diagram (Moher et al., 
2009). The following section will introduce the systematic review procedures.

3.1 Database   search

In order to locate the relevant articles, the systematic search was conducted on the 
following electronic databases: Web of Science, Scopus, ACM, IEEE, Taylor & 
Francis, Wiley, EBSCO. We selected these databases since they were considered as 
the major publisher databases (Guan et al., 2020). Filters were limited to the time 
period from January 2011 to December 2020 and were applied to the peer-reviewed 
and empirical research articles written in English in order to ensure the quality of 
the review articles. After the screening of the full articles, the snowballing approach 
was performed based on the guidelines to fnd the articles that were not extracted by 
using the search strings (Wohlin, 2014). At this stage, Google Scholar was used to 
searching specifc articles.

3.2 Search   terms

A structured search strategy was used for various bibliographic databases with key-
words used according to each database’s specifc requirements. In both the elec-
tronic and manual searches, specifc keywords related to AI and commonly-used 
algorithms or techniques (i.e., “intelligence”, “AI”, and “AIEd”), AI applications 
(i.e., “intelligent tutoring system”, “expert system”, and “prediction model”), and 
algorithms (i.e., “decision tree”, “machine learning”, “neural network”, “deep learn-
ing”, “k-means”, “random forest”, “support vector machines”, “logistic regression”, 
“fuzzy-logic”, “Bayesian network”, “latent Dirichlet allocation”, “natural language 
processing”, “genetic algorithm”, and “genetic programming”) were used. In addi-
tion, as this review focused on the context in online higher education, the follow-
ing keywords were added: “online education”, “online learning”, “e-learning”, 
“MOOC”, “SPOC” “blended learning”, “higher education”, “online higher educa-
tion”, “undergraduate education”, and “graduated education”.

                                                              1 3
7898                           Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

Table 1   A summary of the inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria                   Exclusion criteria

Research must be conducted in online higher educa- Research from conference proceedings, book 
 tion.                                chapters, magazines, news, and posters are 
                                      excluded.
Research must report the efects of actual instruction Uncompleted research is excluded, for example, 
 and learning processes with the support of AI. research that only reports AI application design, 
                                      but do not report empirical results.
Research must be published in peer-reviewed Empirical research merely used self-report data 
 journals.                            collections, such as interviews or surveys, are 
                                      excluded.
Research must reported as empirical research to 
 demonstrate actual efects of AI in education 
 contexts.
Research must be reported in English.
Research must be published from 2011 to 2020.
Full-text is available.


3.3  Inclusion and exclusion criteria

The search criteria were designed to locate the articles that focused on the appli-
cations of AI in online higher education. In terms of the research questions, a set 
of inclusion and exclusion criteria were adopted (see Table 1).

3.4 T he screening process

The screening process involved the following steps: (1) removing the duplicated 
articles, (2) removing the articles that did not meet the inclusion criteria based 
on the titles and abstracts, (3) reading the full texts again and removing the arti-
cles that did not meet the inclusion criteria, (4) using the snowballing approach 
to further locate the articles in Google Scholar, and (5) extracting data from the 
fnal fltered articles (see Fig. 2). All articles were imported into the Mendeley 
software for screening.
  The search produced 434 articles from the previously-used search terms, 
including 92 duplicates that were deleted. By reviewing the titles and abstracts, 
the number of articles was reduced to 91 based on the criteria (see Table  1). 
The selected articles were examined by the second author to determine whether 
they were suitable for the purpose of the study. The frst author independently 
reviewed approximately 30% of the articles to confrm the reliability. The inter-
rater agreement was initially 90% and then was brought to 100% agreement after 
discussion. Then, the full-text of articles were reviewed by both authors to verify 
that the articles met all the criteria for inclusion in the review. Eventually, a total 
of 32 articles that met the criteria were included in the fnal systematic review.

1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925         7899


Fig. 2  PRISMA fow chart of study selection process


3.5  Analysis

The articles that met the inclusion criteria were analyzed using the bibliomet-
ric analysis approach (Neuendorf & Kumar, 2015). We calculated the frequen-
cies for each category of AIEd in online higher education. The qualitative content 
analysis method was carried out to categorize the articles (Zupic & Čater, 2015). 
We classifed the information from the articles relevant to the research questions. 
Three strategies were used to establish the credibility of the analysis. First, two 
researchers had ongoing meetings to verify the categories of the reviewed articles 
(Graneheim & Lundman, 2004). Second, detailed explanations of the categories 
that emerged as fndings for each research question were provided in the result 
section (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). Finally, we provided examples to demonstrate 

                                                              1 3
7900                           Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

how well the categories represented the data to answer the research questions 
(Graneheim & Lundman, 2004).


4  Results

Among the 32 empirical articles, 72% of the articles were published after 2016. 
The articles fnally selected were published in 23 diferent journals. The major 
countries or areas for the 32 studies were also identifed. The most prolifc coun-
try or area in AIEd research was Spain that had 5 publications (16%), followed 
by the USA (4 publications, 13%), and Taiwan (4 publications, 13%). Further-
more, three journals were found with more than two relevant articles that met 
the criteria, including Computers in Human Behavior (n = 4,  13%), Computers 
& Education (n = 3,  9%),  and Interactive Learning Environments (n = 3,  9%)  (see 
Appendix Table 2).

4.1  RQ1: What are the functions of AI applications in online higher education?

There are four major functions of AI applications in online higher education: pre-
dictions of learning status, performance or satisfaction (n = 21,  66%),  resource 
recommendation (n = 7, 22%), automatic assessment (n = 2, 6%), and improve-
ment of learning experience (n = 2, 6%) (see Fig. 3).


Fig. 3  The pie chart of the 
functions of AI applications in 
online higher education
                                           2 (6%)

                                       2 (6%)

                                  7 (22%)


                                                  21 (66%)


                             Predictions of learning status, performance or satisfaction
                             Resource recommendation
                             Automatic assessment
                             Improvement of learning experience

1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925         7901

4.1.1 redictions  P  of learning status, performance or satisfaction

The frst function of AI application is the prediction of student performances, that is 
to illustrate student learning status or performance in advance. Among 32 reviewed 
articles, 21 articles (66%) focused on the predictions of student performance in 
online higher education context. Further examinations identifed three categories: 
prediction of dropout risks (n = 13, 41%), prediction of student academic perfor-
mances (n = 7, 22%), and prediction of student satisfactions about online courses 
(n = 1, 3%) (see Appendix Table 2).
  In the frst category regarding the prediction models for diagnosing the risks of 
student dropout, Mubarak et  al. (2020) constructed a prediction model to predict 
the students who were at-risk of dropout based on the interaction logs in the online 
learning environment. The results showed that the proposed models achieved an 
accuracy of 84%, which was better than the baseline of machine learning models. 
Aguiar et al. (2014) analyzed engineering students’ electronic portfolios to predict 
their persistence in online courses, and results proved a consistently better per-
formance than those models based on the traditional academic data (SAT scores, 
GPA, demographics, etc.) alone. The second category is the prediction of student 
academic performance. For example, Almeda et  al. (2018) used the classifcation 
models to predict whether students would succeed in the online courses and fur-
ther used the regression models to predict students’ numerical scores. One key fnd-
ing was that the features related to course comments were signifcant predictors of 
the fnal grades. Romero et al. (2013b) collected the forum messages to predict stu-
dent performance and they found that the students who actively participated in the 
forum, posted messages more frequently with a high quality were more likely to 
pass the course. The third category is the prediction of student satisfaction levels 
about online courses. Only one study was located: Hew et al. (2020) analyzed the 
course features of 249 randomly sampled MOOCs and 6,393 students’ perceptions 
were examined to understand what factors predicted student satisfaction. They found 
that the course instructor, content, assessment, and time schedule played signifcant 
roles in explaining the student satisfaction levels.

4.1.2  Resource  recommendation

Among 32 reviewed articles, 7 articles (22%) focused on the resource recommen-
dation in online higher education context. For example, Benhamdi et  al. (2017) 
designed a recommendation approach to provide online students with the appropri-
ate learning materials based on their preferences, interests, background knowledge, 
and memory capacities to store information. The results concluded that this recom-
mendation system improved students’ learning quality. Christudas et al. (2018) used 
the compatible genetic algorithm (CGA) to provide suitable learning content for 
individual students based on the preferred learning objects they previously chose. 
The results showed that the students’ scores and satisfaction levels were improved 
in an e-learning environment. In the online programming courses, Cárdenas-Cobo 
et  al. (2020) developed a system called CARAMBA to suggest suitable learning 
exercises for students in scratch programming. Results confrmed that those exercise 
                                                              1 3
7902                           Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

recommendations in Scratch had improved the student’s programming capabili-
ties. In summary, AI has been used in online higher education to recommend learn-
ers suitable and personalized resources based on learners’ fxed and dynamic 
characteristics.

4.1.3  Automatic  assessment

Among 32 reviewed articles, 2 articles (6%) focused on the automatic assessment 
in online higher education context. Hooshyar et al. (2016) developed an ITS system 
called Tic-tac-toe Quiz for Single-Player (TRIS-Q-SP) to provide students forma-
tive assessment of their computer programming performances and problem-solving 
capacities. The empirical research demonstrated that the proposed system enhanced 
student learning interests, positive attitudes, degree of technology acceptance, and 
problem solving activities. Aluthman (2016) developed the automated essay evalu-
ation (AEE) system to provide students with immediate assessment, feedback, and 
automated scores in an online English learning environment and examined the 
efects of utilizing AEE on undergraduate students’ writing performance. The results 
indicated that the AEE system had a positive efect on improving students’ writing 
performance. In summary, AI has been used in online higher education to automati-
cally assess students’ performances and learning capacities, to provide timely feed-
back to students, and to improve students’ self-awareness and self-refection.

4.1.4  Improvement of learning experience

Among 32 reviewed articles, 2 articles (6%) focused on the optimization of learn-
ing experiences by improving learner interactions with learning environments or 
resources in online higher education context. Ijaz et al. (2017) created virtual reality 
(VR) tool that applied the AI technique for history learning. The VR tool allowed 
students immerse themselves into the virtual environments of cities and learn by 
browsing and interacting with virtual citizens. The results confrmed that this AI-
enabled virtual learning mode was more engaging and motivating for students, 
compared to simply reading the history texts or watching educational videos. Koć-
Januchta et  al. (2020) compared student interaction and learning quality between 
the designed AI-enriched biology books and traditional e-books. Results found that 
the students who used the AI-enriched book asked more questions and kept higher 
retention than those engaged in reading the traditional e-books.

4.2  RQ2: What AI algorithms are used to achieve those functions in online higher 
    education?

Among the 32 reviewed articles, 24 articles specifed the AI algorithms they used 
in the research. Those eight articles used AI systems or tools (e.g., recommendation 
systems) but did not specify the AI algorithms they used. Among the 24 articles, the 
most commonly used AI algorithms were DT (n = 14, 44%), NN (n = 8,  25%),  NB 
1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925         7903


Fig. 4  The distribution of AI algorithms. Note: DT: Decision Tree; NN: Neural Network; SVM: Support 
Vector Machine; NB: Naive Bayes; RF: Random Forest; LGR: Logistic Regression; LR: Liner Regres-
sion; KNN: K-Nearest Neighbours; NLP: Neural Language Processing; BN: Bayes Network; XGBoost: 
Extreme Gradient Boosting; SVC: Support Vector Classifcation; Splines: Multivariate Adaptive Regres-
sion Splines; SMO: Sequential Minimal Optimizer; RG: Regression; LDA: Linear Discriminant Analy-
sis; IOHMM: Input-Output Hidden Markov Model; GaNB: Gaussian Naive Bayes; GA: Genetic Algo-
rithm; CART: Classifcation and Regression Tree; MLP: Multi-Layer Perceptron; BART: Bayesian 
Additive Regressive Trees

(n = 7, 22%) and SVM (n = 7, 22%). Some research used multiple algorithms in one 
study (see Fig. 4 and Appendix Table 3).
  The systematic review found that relatively traditional algorithms included DT, 
LGR, NB, SVM, and NLP. For example, Almeda et al. (2018) used the J48 DT to 
predict whether a student would successfully pass the course and further used the 
regression models to predict student’s numerical grades. Mubarak et al. (2020) pro-
posed two AI models, namely the Logistic Regression and the input-output hidden 
Markov model, to predict student dropout risk. Yoo and Kim (2014) used online dis-
cussion participation as the predictor for class project performance and used Support 
Vector Machine (SVM) for data processing and automatic classifers. Helal et  al. 
(2018) created diferent classifcation models for predicting student performance, 
including two black-box methods, namely NB and SMO, an optimization algorithm 
for training SVM, and two white box methods (i.e., J48 and JRip). Natural language 
processing (NLP) was applied to automatically assess student performance and to 
detect student satisfaction. For example, Aluthman (2016) adopted the NLP tech-
niques to automatically evaluate essays and provided students with both automated 
scores and immediate feedback. Hew et al. (2020) used the NLP techniques to iden-
tify what students commented to predict students’ satisfaction levels with MOOCs.
  Advanced machine learning algorithms such as NN and GA were also used in 
some research. For example, Sukhbaatar et al. (2019) employed the NN method 
                                                              1 3
7904                           Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

to predict student failure tendency based on multiple variables extracted from the 
online learning activities in a learning management system. Results showed that 
25% of the failing students were correctly identifed after the frst quiz submis-
sion; after the mid-term examination, 65% of the failing students were correctly 
predicted. Yang et al. (2017) presented a time series NN method for predicting 
the evolution of student average CFA grade in two MOOCs. Results found that 
the NN-based algorithms consistently outperformed a baseline model that sim-
ply averaged historical CFA data. Christudas et al. (2018) presented a GA-enable 
approach for recommending personalized learning content for individual students 
in the e-learning system and the results found an improvement of students’ fnal 
scores in the course.
  An important factor in the AI models is the choice of input variables. Primary 
variables used in the 32 articles included demographic, assignment, previous score, 
quiz access, forum access, course material access, login behavior, etc. (see Appen-
dix Table 3). Demographic variables include students’ gender, age, race, ethnicity 
information. The assignment category includes whether the assignment is completed 
and submitted. The previous score refers to the historical grades of students for dif-
ferent courses or learning activities, the standardized high school test scores or con-
tinuous assessment activities. The quiz access includes the times of quiz attempt, 
whether the quiz is complete or not, quiz scores, and solving time. The forum is 
where student’s ideas on a particular subject have exchange and communicated with 
their instructor and peers. This category includes the number of forum views, num-
ber of forum posts, times of reply, post content, etc. The course material informa-
tion contains the total time material viewed, and time consumed on materials. Login 
behaviors mainly include the online learning days, times of access, time consump-
tion per week. Among those variables, forum and course material access were the 
most commonly used, followed by student scores and login behaviors.
  When using AI algorithms, researchers tended to compare the efciency and 
efectiveness of using diferent AI algorithms to address the same research purpose. 
For example, Moreno-Marcos et al. (2018) collected the data from a Java program-
ming MOOC to determine what factors afected the predictions and in which way 
it was possible to predict scores. In this work, four algorithms, namely RG, SVM, 
DT, and RF, were used and results were compared to identify which one provided 
the best results. In a blended learning context, Sukhbaatar et al. (2019) proposed an 
early prediction scheme to identify the student who was at risk of failing. NN, SVM, 
DT, and NB methods were compared for the failure prediction in terms of prediction 
efectiveness. Baneres et al. (2019) presented an adaptive predictive model called 
GRADUAL AT-RISK MODEL and developed an early warning system, and an 
early feedback prediction system to intervene at-risk identifcation of students. Four 
classifcation algorithms, NB, CART DT, KNN, and SV, were tested to determine 
which classifcation algorithm best ft the GAR model. In addition, Howard et al. 
(2018) examined eight prediction methods, including BART, RF, PCR, Splines, 
KNN, NN, and SVM, to identify students’ fnal grades. Huang et  al. (2020) col-
lected the applied eight classifers based on students’ online learning logs, namely 
GaNB, SVC, linear-SVC, LR, DT, RF, NN, and XGBoost, to predict the student 
academic performances. They also employed fve evaluators, namely accuracy, 
1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925         7905

Fig. 5  The pie chart of the 
implications of AI applications 
in online higher education


precision, recall, the F1-measure, and AUC to measure the predictive performance 
for classifcation methods.

4.3  RQ3: What are the efects and implications of AI applications 
    on the instruction and learning processes in online higher education?

The positive efects were identifed by using AI applications in online higher educa-
tion to improve the instruction and learning quality: a high quality of AI-enabled 
prediction with multiple input variables (n = 20, 62%), a high quality of AI-enabled 
recommendations based on student characteristics (n = 5, 16%), an improvement of 
students’ academic performances (n = 5, 16%), an improvement of online engage-
ment and participation (n = 2, 6%) (see Fig. 5 and Appendix Table 4).

4.3.1  A high quality of AI‑enabled prediction with multiple input variables

Evidence has been reported that students enrolled in online courses have higher 
dropout rates than those in the traditional classroom settings (Breslow et al., 2013; 
Tyler-Smith, 2006). An increase in rates of dropout unavoidably leads to reduce 
graduation rates, which may have a negative efect on the online learning quality 
(Simpson, 2018).AI applications in online higher education are mainly the pre-
diction models to predict the student’s risk of dropouts and fnal academic perfor-
mance. The prediction of student academic performance help identifes the students 
who have difculties understanding the course materials or who are at risk of failing 
the exam (Tomasevic et  al., 2020). For example, the results obtained by Baneres 
et al. (2019) proved that the prediction system achieved early detection of potential 
at-risk students, ofered the guidance and feedback with visualization dashboards, 
and enhanced the interaction with at-risk students. In this way, the prediction system 
                                                              1 3
7906                           Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

helped instructors or administrators identify students’ learning issues, assist students 
in regulating and refecting on the learning processes, and further provide students 
with instant intervention and guidance at an early stage during the course (Moreno-
Marcos et al., 2018).
  Articles reviewed in this work indicated a high quality of accuracy of the predic-
tion models that have used multiple input variables and advanced AI algorithms. For 
example, Aguiar et al. (2014) found that the performance of the prediction models 
with ePortfolio data was consistently better than those models based on academic 
performance data alone. Costa et al. (2017) predicted students’ academic failure in 
introductory programming courses based on multiple student data, including age, 
gender, student registration, semester, campus, year of enrolling in the course, sta-
tus on discipline, number of correct exercises, and performance of the students etc. 
Moreover, advanced AI algorithms such as genetic algorithms and input-output 
hidden Markov model has been applied in predicting systems, which was proved 
to achieve more accurate results than traditional algorithms (Mubarak et al., 2020). 
Therefore, to achieve an accurate prediction, AI-enabled models should frst con-
sider using multiple input variables from students’ learning processes rather than 
merely using summative performance scores, and second use advanced AI algo-
rithms to achieve precisions of the relations between the learning inputs and per-
formance outputs (Chassignol et al., 2018; Godwin & Kirn, 2020; Tomasevic et al., 
2020).

4.3.2  A high quality of AI‑enabled recommendations based on student 
     characteristics

A high quality of recommendation requires the algorithm model take into consid-
eration students’ diverse characteristics, such as knowledge levels, learning styles or 
preferences, learning profles and interests, etc. Our review showed that fve studies 
related to recommendation have reported that their methods generated a high-quality 
recommendation for students. For example, Benhamdi et al. (2017) proposed a new 
recommendation approach based on collaborative, content-based fltering to provide 
students the best learning materials according to their preferences, interests, back-
ground knowledge, and memory capacity. The experiment results showed there was 
a signifcant diference between the marks of pre-tests and post-tests, which indi-
cated that students acquired more knowledge when they used the proposed recom-
mender system. Additionally, Bousbahi & Chorf (2015) used the case-based reason-
ing (CBR) approach and the special retrieval information technique to recommend 
the most appropriate MOOCs courses that best-suited student needs based on their 
learning profles, needs, and knowledge levels. In addition to personalized learn-
ing recommendation. Dwivedi & Bharadwaj (2015) designed an e-Learning rec-
ommender system for a group of students by considering students’ learning styles, 
knowledge levels, and ratings of learners in a group. The results demonstrated the 
efectiveness of the proposed group recommendation strategy. Although those stud-
ies verifed the short-term efects of recommendation systems, there is a lack of 
investigations on the efects of applying the recommendation systems or methods in 
students’ long-term learning. Future work should introduce both fxed and dynamic 
1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925         7907

characteristics of students, carry out experiments with large sample size, in order to 
confrm the accuracy of recommendation systems.

4.3.3  An improvement of students’ academic performance

The results indicated that AI systems and tools helped improve students’ academic 
performances by optimizing learning environments and experiences, recommend-
ing learning resources or providing automatic feedback and assessment in online 
learning. For example. Ijaz et al. (2017) found that students in the VR context com-
bined with AI techniques performed better in comprehending the materials than 
the control groups without AI support. Cárdenas-Cobo et  al. (2020) presented an 
easy-to-use web application called CARAMBA involving Scratch alongside a rec-
ommender system for exercises. Results confrmed that, in terms of pass rates, the 
recommending exercises in Scratch had a positive efect on the student’s program-
ming abilities. The pass rate was over 52%, which was 8% higher than that in the 
previous exercises with Scratch (without recommendation) and 21% higher than the 
historical results of traditional programming teaching (without Scratch). Compared 
to the traditional learning approaches (e.g., reading textbooks), AI can provide stu-
dents with more intelligent and personalized interaction forms, such that the inter-
action between students and learning resources and the degree of participation in 
learning can be improved. More importantly, since improper contents that do not ft 
students’ learning styles, or their knowledge or ability levels may lead to informa-
tion overload or lack of learning orientation, which would negatively afect student 
academic performance (Chen, 2008; Christudas et al., 2018). AI can optimized per-
sonalized resource recommendations based on students’ characteristics, which has 
been emphasized as a crucial issue in e-learning and online learning (Chang & Ke, 
2013). In addition, providing automatic feedback was also a good way to improve 
student academic performance because it could give students personalized diagno-
ses and suggestions (e.g., Aluthman, 2016), that improves student’s learning motiva-
tions and efectiveness (Gardner et al., 2002; Henly, 2003). In conclusion, it can be 
summarized from the existing research that with the support of AI, student academic 
performance can be promoted in terms of the fnal grades, completion rate of course 
or learning satisfaction levels.

4.3.4  An improvement of online engagement and participation

AI systems or techniques can positively infuence student’s online engagement 
through providing personalized resources, automatic assessment, and timely feed-
back. For example, Ijaz et al. (2017) investigated a technological combination of AI-
enabled virtual reality with an aim to improve the learning experiences and learner 
engagement. The results found that compared to simply reading the history texts 
or watching educational videos, the AI-enabled learning mode was more engag-
ing and motivating for the students. Koć-Januchta et al. (2020) explored students’ 
engagement and patterns of activity with AI book and traditional digital E-book. 
The research collected students’ pre- and post-test scores, cognitive load, motiva-
tion, usability questionnaires and interviews. The results found that students who 
                                                              1 3
7908                           Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

used the AI-enriched books asked more questions and kept higher retention than 
those engaged in reading the traditional e-books, which indicated the improvement 
of student engagement. Therefore, the results indicate that AI supported learning 
has potential to improve students’ online engagement with learning materials, online 
courses and their peers. Given that online students often have a low level of par-
ticipation in online learning, which would lead to problems such as dropping out or 
academic failure, AI technological support has potential to improve students’ online 
engagement with learning materials, online courses and their peers. This is a great 
way to improve students’ learning engagement and participation and thus reduce 
their academic failure to some extent.

5  Discussions  and implications

The application of artifcial intelligence (AI) has brought new challenges for 
improving instruction and learning in online higher education. Given that there is 
limited literature review examining the actual efects of AI in online higher edu-
cation, it is necessary to gain a deep understanding of the functions, efects, and 
implications of AI applications in online higher education. Furthermore, there has 
been a critical gap between what AIEd technologies can do, how they are imple-
mented in authentic online higher education settings, and to what extent the use 
of AI applications infuence actual online instruction and learning (Kabudi et  al., 
2021; Ouyang & Jiao, 2021). The systematic literature review specifcally focuses 
on AI applications in online higher education and the results show that performance 
prediction, resource recommendation, automatic assessment, and improvement 
of learning experiences are the four main funcitons of AI applications in online 
higher education. Regarding AI techniques, it is found that the algorithms such as 
DT, LRG, NN, and BT, are the most commonly adopted in the online educational 
contexts. Advanced DL algorithms such as GA and DNN have seldom been found, 
which is consistent with the fndings from Zawacki-Richter et al. (2019) and Chen 
et al. (2020b). Regarding the actual efects of AI in online higher education, sev-
eral empirical research have reported positive efects of AI application in improv-
ing online instruction and learning quality, including a high quality of AI-enabled 
prediction, a high quality of AI-enabled recommendations, an improvement of aca-
demic performances as well as an improvement of online engagement and participa-
tion. Based on the review results, to achieve a high quality of prediction, assessment 
or recommendation, AI-enabled systems or models should frst model take into con-
sideration students’ diverse characteristics from both learning processes and summa-
tive performances, and second use advanced AI algorithms to achieve precisions of 
the outcome in order to improve students’ learning motivation, engagement and per-
formance. With the innovation and advancement of AI technologies and techniques, 
the applications of AI promote the transformation of higher education from tradi-
tional, instructor-directed lecturing to AI-enabled, student-centered learning (Chen 
et al., 2020a; Ouyang & Jiao, 2021).
  Based on the results of this literature review, we propose the theoretical, tech-
nological, and practical implications for the applications of AI in online higher 
1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925         7909

education. First, from the theoretical perspective, educational theories have not been 
adopted to underpin the application of AI in online higher education. Similar to the 
previous work (Chen et al., 2020b, Ouyang & Jiao, 2021; Zawacki-Richter et al., 
2019), few studies have focused on building the connection between the educational 
and learning theories and AI-supported online higher education. Although advanced 
AI technology has the potential to improve online higher education quality (Holmes 
et  al., 2019), good educational outcomes do not occur by merely using advanced 
AI technologies (Castañeda & Selwyn, 2018; Du Boulay, 2000; Selwyn, 2016). 
More importantly, the use of AI technologies and applications generally imply 
diferent pedagogical perspectives, which in turn pose critical infuences on the 
design and implementation of instruction and learning (Hwang et al., 2020; Ouy-
ang & Jiao, 2021). As Chen et al. (2020b) suggested, social constructivism (Vygot-
sky, 1978), situational theory (Kim & Grunig, 2011), distributed cognition (Hollan 
et al., 2000) are worthwhile to be studied while integrating AI applications in online 
higher education. Ouyang & Jiao (2021) proposed the three paradigms of AIEd from 
the theoretical perspective (i.e., AI-directed, learner-as-recipient, AI-supported, 
learner-as-collaborator, and AI-empowered, learner-as-leader), which could serve 
as the reference framework to explore varied ways of addressing the learning and 
instructional issues with the AI applications. In summary, based on the existing edu-
cational and learning theories, researchers and practitioners can integrate pedagogy 
and learning sciences with AIEd applications to derive multiple perspectives and 
interpretations about AIEd in online higher education (Hwang et al., 2020; Hwang 
& Tu, 2021; Ouyang & Jiao, 2021).
  Second, from the technological perspective, AI technologies, models and appli-
cations in online higher education are expected to seek the potential of integrating 
students’ learning process characteristics with AI, to connect and strengthen inter-
actions between AI and educators and students, and to address the issues regard-
ing the biases in AI algorithms, and non-transparency of why and how AI deci-
sions are made (Hwang et al., 2020; Hwang & Tu, 2021; Ouyang & Jiao, 2021). 
This review has illustrated the importance of data collection and analysis of learn-
ing process data in addition to summative data in order to achieve a high quality 
of AI-enabled prediction or recommendation. The advancement of emerging com-
puter technologies, such as quantum computing, wearable devices, robot control, 
and sensing devices, and 5G wireless communication technologies, have provided 
new afordances and opportunities to integrate AI with collection and analysis of 
online learning processes in online higher education (Chen et  al., 2020b; Hwang 
et  al., 2020). When integrating into online higher education, AI has the potential 
to provide student with a practical or experiential learning experience, particularly 
when AI is integrated with other technologies such as VR, 3D, gaming, and simula-
tion, and thereby improving the student learning experience and academic perfor-
mance. To advance the state-of-the-art of AIEd technologies in online higher educa-
tion, it is necessary to provide a bridge to facilitate the interaction and collaboration 
between educators or students with AI systems or tools, which can help obtain a 
multifaceted understanding of student status and achieve a good learning perfor-
mance prediction (Giannakos et al., 2019). With the support of real-time AI algo-
rithm models, it has the potential to collect and feedback information from human 
                                                              1 3
7910                           Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

to AI systems in a timely fashion. In this way, AI applications can collect and make 
sense of the user-generated data to provide a deeper understanding of the real-time 
interaction between humans and technologies in online higher education (Giannakos 
et al., 2019; Ouyang & Jiao, 2021; Xie et al., 2019). Future research can consider to 
develop prediction models that can be used in heterogeneous contexts across plat-
forms, thematic areas, and course durations, This approach has potential to enhance 
the predictive power of current models by improving algorithms or adding novel 
higher-order features from students or groups (Moreno-Marcos et al., 2019). Over-
all, since online higher education stresses learner-centered learning, integration of 
human intelligence and machine intelligence can help AIEd transform from tradi-
tional lecturing to learner-centered learning (Ouyang & Jiao, 2021).
  Third, from the practical perspective, AIEd advancement calls for more empirical 
research to examine what are the diferent roles of AI in online higher education, 
how AI are connected to the existing educational and learning theories, and to what 
extent the use of AI technologies infuence online learning quality (Hwang et al., 
2020; Kabudi et al., 2021; Ouyang & Jiao, 2021). As researchers pointed out in a 
recent literature review, there has been a discrepancy between the potentials of AIEd 
and their actual implementations in online higher education (Kabudi et al., 2021). 
The discrepancy is caused by a separation of AI technology and the complex educa-
tional system (Xu & Ouyang, 2021). The review results also show a limited research 
work on examining the long-term efect and implication of applying AI to improve 
online instruction and learning. Therefore, AIEd needs to be designed and applied 
with the awareness that the AI technology is a part of a larger educational system, 
consisting of multiple components, e.g., learners, instructors, and information and 
resources (Riedl, 2019). To better examine the learning efects, AIEd empirical 
research should design more comprehensive assessment methods to incorporate var-
ious student features (e.g., student motivation, anxiety, higher-order thinking, behav-
ioral patterns) in the AI model, and use multimodal learning analytics to collect and 
analyze data (e.g., process-oriented discourse data, physiological sensing data, eye-
tracking) (Ouyang & Jiao, 2021). In addition, the review indicates that most empiri-
cal research is conducted in a short period of time duration, therefore more empiri-
cal research is needed to enlarge the sample size and experiment duration in order 
to verify the efects of AI applications in online higher education. Overall, a deep 
understanding can be achieved by conducting more empirical research to examine 
the roles of AI in online higher education, educational and learning theories under-
pinned AIEd, and the actual efects of AI on online learning quality (Gartner, 2019; 
Law, 2019; Tegmark, 2017).

6  Conclusions

This systematic review provides an overview of empirical research on the applica-
tions of AI in online higher education. Specifcally, this literature review examines 
the functions of empirical researches, the algorithms used in empirical researches 
and the efects and implications generated by empirical research. Although the 
research and practice of AI applications in online higher education are still in the 
1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925         7911

preliminary and exploratory stage, AI is proved to be positive to enhance online 
instruction and learning quality by ofering accurate prediction, assessment and 
engaging students with online materials and environments (Yang et  al., 2020; 
Zawacki-Richter et  al., 2019). The innovative applications of AI in online higher 
education are conducive to reform instructional design and development methods, 
as well as advance the constructions of the intelligent, networked, personalized, and 
lifelong educational system (Arsovic & Stefanovic, 2020; Ouyang & Jiao,  2021; 
Yang et al., 2020).
  This systematic review has several limitations, which lead to future research 
directions. First, the process of search query might not guarantee full completeness 
and absence of bias. Although we used the keyword list suggested by the previ-
ous review studies to search for the relevant articles, not all studies were included 
as diverse terms have been used to represent AI technologies. Second, the stud-
ies reviewed in this article were fltered from the seven prominent databases and 
the articles were limited to journal articles. For example, the recent conference 
proceedings were excluded, which may lead to the absence of the latest technical 
reports of AIEd in online higher education. Since AIEd is an interdisciplinary feld 
where scholars come from diferent felds particularly computer science and educa-
tion areas, studies might be published as conference papers that were not included. 
Therefore, future studies can adjust the screening criteria such that more relevant 
studies can be included. Third, the current study only provided a systematic over-
view of AI in online higher education, a formal meta-analysis would be benefcial to 
report the efect sizes of selected empirical research to gain a deeper understanding 
of the feld.
  Critical questions that need to be carefully considered include: How AI algo-
rithms and models can be improved in online higher education? How AI systems 
or tools should be implemented to improve the instruction and learning practices in 
online higher education? How to conduct longitudinal empirical research in order to 
reveal authentic and long-term results of applying AI in online instruction and learn-
ing? This systematic review has provided initial implications for those questions, 
such as taking into consideration students’ diverse characteristics, using advanced 
AI algorithms to achieve precisions, conducting longitudinal research to examine 
long-term efect of AI applications. Future work should continue on this research 
and practice trend. Overall, consistent with previous work (e.g., Deeva et al., 2021; 
Holmes et al., 2019; Hwang et al., 2020), AIEd applications in online higher educa-
tion are expected to enable learners to refect on learning and inform AI systems to 
adapt accordingly, improve prediction, recommendation and assessment accuracy, 
and facilitate learner agency, empowerment, and personalization in student-centered 
learning.


Appendix

Tables 2, 3 and 4

                                                              1 3
7912                                                                                                                      Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925
                                PD
                                           PA
                                                               PD
                                                                         Rec       Rec
                                                                                             PD        Rec
                                                                                                                 Rec
                                                                                                                           Rec
                                                                                                                                     PA        Rec
                                                                                                                                                         PA
                                                                                                                                                                    PS
                                                                                                                                                                              Ass
                                                                                                                                                                                        PD
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Exp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Exp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rec       PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PD
                 Country  or Area       (RQ1) Functions
                                India
                                           Columbia
                                                     Saudi  Arabia                  Ass
                                                               Spain
                                                                         USA       Saudi  Arabia
                                                                                             Spain     Spain
                                                                                                                 China
                                                                                                                           India
                                                                                                                                     Brazil    India
                                                                                                                                                         Australia
                                                                                                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                              Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Taiwan
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Taiwan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Taiwan    Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Japan
                 Journal
                                Journal  of Learning Analytics
                                           Online  Learning
                                                     International  Journal Linguistics  of English
                                                               IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies IEEE  Transactions
                                                                         Education and Information Technologies Education  and Information
                                                                                             Computers and ElectricalComputers  Engineering
                                                                                                                 World Wide Web  Wide World
                                                                                                                           Telematics and Informatics Telematics
                                                                                                                                     Computers in Human Behavior Computers
                                                                                                                                                         Knowledge-Based Systems Knowledge-Based
                                                                                                                                                                    Computers & Education Computers
                                                                                                                                                                              Computers & Education Computers
                                                                                                                                                                                        The  Internet  and Higher Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Computers in Human Behavior Computers
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Interactive Learning  Environments Interactive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Interactive Learning  Environments Interactive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Journal  of learning  analytics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Journal Research  of Educational Computing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications Expert With  Systems
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Interactive Learning  Environments Interactive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Computers & Education Computers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning International  Journal Technologies  of Emerging
     verview of selected articles RQ1  address  to verview
                 Author
     An  o
      
     2
      
     Table       No
                                1                           ( 2014 )  et al. Aguiar
                                           2                          ( 2018 ) Almeda et al.
                                                     3                          Aluthman  ( 2016 )
                                                               4                          ( 2019 )  et al. Baneres
                                                                         5                          ( 2017 ) Benhamdi et al.
                                                                                   67                         Bousbahi and Chorf ( 2015 ) ( 2018 )  et al. Burgos  Sciences  - Social and Behavioral Procedia
                                                                                                       89                         ( 2020 ) et al. Cárdenas-Cobo  ( 2014 ) Chen et al.  on Learning  Technologies IEEE Transactions
                                                                                                                           10                      Christudas ( 2018 )  et al.
                                                                                                                                     11                      ( 2017 ) Costa  et al.
                                                                                                                                               1213                    ( 2015 ) and Bharadwaj Dwivedi  ( 2018 ) Helal et al. Expert  Systems
                                                                                                                                                                    14                     ( 2020 )  et al. Hew
                                                                                                                                                                              15                     ( 2016 )  et al. Hooshyar
                                                                                                                                                                                        16                     ( 2018 )  et al. Howard
                                                                                                                                                                                                  17                      ( 2014 ) Hu et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            18                      ( 2020 ) Huang et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19                      ( 2017 ) Ijaz et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20                      ( 2014 )  et al. Jayaprakash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          21                      ( 2020 )  et al. Koć-Januchta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    22                      ( 2012 ) Li et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2324                    ( 2018 ) et al. Moreno-Marcos  ( 2020 )  et al. Mubarak  Technology  & Information Behaviour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25                      ( 2013b )  et al. Romero
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            26                      Sukhbaatar ( 2019 )  et al.

 1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7913
                                PA
                                          PD
                                                    PA
                                                              PA
                                                                        PA
                                                                                  PA
                 Country  or Area       (RQ1) Functions
                                UK
                                          USA
                                                    China
                                                              Taiwan
                                                                        USA
                 Journal
                                British  Journal of Educational Technology
                                          Computers in Human Behavior Computers
                                                    Computers in Human Behavior Computers
                                                              IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing IEEE  Journal  of Selected Topics
                                                                        International  Journal  of Artifcial in Education  Intelligence
                                                                                  International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher EducationInternational  Journal  of Educational Technology Dubai
                 Author
     (continued)
      
     2
      
     Table       No
                                27                     ( 2020 )  et al. Wakelam
                                          28                      ( 2016 ) Xing et al.
                                                    29                      ( 2019 )  et al. Xu
                                                              30                      ( 2017 )  et al. Yang
                                                                        31                      and Kim ( 2014 ) Yoo
                                                                                  32                      Zohair ( 2019 )
                                                                                                Ass: Assessment; Exp: Learning experiences; PA: Prediction of academic performance; PD: Prediction of dropout; PS: prediction of student satisfaction about online satisfaction  performance; of academic  of student Prediction  prediction  of dropout; PS: Prediction  PD: Ass:  Assessment;Learning Exp:  PA:  experiences;  Recommendation courses;  Rec:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 3
7914                                                                                                                      Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925
                                        X
                                                                                                                                                                                                             X
                                                                                                                                                                                           X
                                                          X
                                                                                                                                                                                                             X                 X
                                                                                                                                                                                           X
                                        X
                                                                                                                                            X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        X
                                                                                                                                                                                                             X                               X
                 Demographic Assignment score previous Quiz Forum Course material Login behavior
                                                                                      X
                                                                                                                                                                                                             X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SVM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JRip
                         rithms
                                                          DT, LR DT,
                                                                                      DT
                                                                                                        Not specifed Not
                                                                                                                          Not specifed Not
                                                                                                                                            LGR
                                                                                                                                                              Not specifed Not
                                                                                                                                                                                Not specifed Not
                                                                                                                                                                                           GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NB, DT, NN,  NN, NB,  DT,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Not specifed Not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NB, SMO, DT, NB,  SMO, DT,
                                                          PA
                                                                            Ass                   NLP
                                                                                                        Rec
                                                                                                                          Rec
                                                                                                                                            PD
                                                                                                                                                              Rec
                                                                                                                                                                                Rec
                                                                                                                                                                                           Rec
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rec
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ass                  BN
                 Group sizeGroup  Functions of AI algo- Type
                                        Not specifedNot PD                RF LGR, NB, DT, X
                                                          233
                                                                                      2148                             PD
                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                          Not specifed Not
                                                                                                                                            100
                                                                                                                                                              88
                                                                                                                                                                                           240
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Not specifed Not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     52
     verview of selected articles RQ2  address  to verview
     An  o
      
                                                ( 2014 )
                                                                  ( 2018 )
                                                                                              ( 2019 )
                                                                                                                ( 2017 )
                                                                                                                                  Chorf  ( 2015 )
                                                                                                                                                    ( 2018 )
                                                                                                                                                                      et al. ( 2020 ) et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ( 2018 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bharadwaj Bharadwaj ( 2015 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ( 2016 )
     3
      
                 Author
     Table       No
                                        1          et al. Aguiar
                                                          2         Almeda et al.
                                                                            3         Aluthman  ( 2016 ) 61
                                                                                      4          et al. Baneres
                                                                                                        5         Benhamdi et al.
                                                                                                                          6         Bousbahi and
                                                                                                                                            7          et al. Burgos
                                                                                                                                                              8         Cárdenas-Cobo
                                                                                                                                                                                9         ( 2014 ) Chen et al. 1000 peers
                                                                                                                                                                                           10    Christudas  et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             11    ( 2017 ) Costa  et al. 423
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12    and Dwivedi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13     ( 2018 ) Helal et al. 2648
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14     ( 2020 ) et al. Hew 6393                   PS                      NLP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15     et al. Hooshyar

 1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7915
                                                                  X
                                                                            X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X
                                        X
                                                                                                                        X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X
                                                                  X                 X
                                                                            X                 X
                                                                                                                                                                      X                 X
                                                                                                                                                                                                          X
                                                                                                                                                                                        X            X                  X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                X            X
                                        X
                                                                  X
                                                                                                                        X                               X
                                                                                                                                                                      X                               X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X                               X
                 Demographic Assignment score previous Quiz Forum Course material Login behavior
                                        X
                                                                                                                        X
                                                Splines, KNN, Splines,  KNN,  SVM NN,
                                                                                    linear-SVC, LR, linear-SVC,   NN,  RF, DT, XGBoost
                                                                                                                                NB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RF
                         rithms
                                                                  DT, CART, LR  CART, DT,
                                                                            GaNB, SVC, GaNB,  SVC,
                                                                                                                        LGR, SVM, DT,  DT,  SVM, LGR,
                                                                                                                                                            Not specifed Not
                                                                                                                                                                      RG, SVM, DT, RF  DT,  SVM, RG,
                                                                                                                                                                                                          DT, NN, BN, JRip,  BN,  NN, DT,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DT, KNN, RF  KNN, DT,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DT, NN, SVM  NN, DT,
                                        PD                    PCR,  RF, BART,
                                                                  PA
                                                                            PA
                                                                                                              Exp                 specifed Not
                                                                                                                        PA
                                                                                                                                          Exp                 specifed Not
                                                                                                                                                            Rec
                                                                                                                                                                      PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA
                 Group sizeGroup  Functions of AI algo- Type
                                        136
                                                                                                                        Not specifed Not
                                                                                                                                          24
                                                                                                                                                                      95,555
                                                                                                                                                                                        10  million logs PD         IOHMM LGR,
                                                                                                                                                                                                          114
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1110                            PD                     NN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              23
     (continued)
      
                                                ( 2018 )
                                                                                                                                ( 2014 )
                                                                                                                                                  ( 2020 )
                                                                                                                                                                              et al. ( 2018 ) et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                ( 2020 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ( 2013b )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ( 2019 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ( 2020 )
     3
      
                 Author
                                                                            Huang et al. ( 2020 )Huang  et al. 7 datasets
     Table       No
                                        16     et al. Howard
                                                                  17    ( 2014 ) Hu et al. 300
                                                                            18
                                                                                                              19    ( 2017 ) Ijaz et al. 20
                                                                                                                        20     et al. Jayaprakash
                                                                                                                                          21     et al. Koć-Januchta
                                                                                                                                                            22    ( 2012 ) Li et al. 500
                                                                                                                                                                      23     Moreno-Marcos
                                                                                                                                                                                        24      et al. Mubarak
                                                                                                                                                                                                          25     et al. Romero
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            26     Sukhbaatar  et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              27     et al. Wakelam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                28    ( 2016 ) Xing et al. 1379                 PD                     DT GBN,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          29    ( 2019 ) et al. Xu 4000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 3
7916                                                                                                                      Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925
                                        X                 X
                                                  X
                                                                    X
                 Demographic Assignment score previous Quiz Forum Course material Login behavior
                                                                            KNN, LDA KNN,
                         rithms
                                        NN
                                                  DT, NB, SVM DT,
                                                                    NN, NB, SVM,  NB, SVM, NN,
                                        PA
                                                  PA
                                                                    PA
                 Group sizeGroup  Functions of AI algo- Type
                                                  Not specifed Not
     (continued)
      
                                                          ( 2014 )
     3
      
                 Author
     Table       No
                                        30    ( 2017 ) et al. Yang  specifed Not
                                                  31    and Kim Yoo
                                                                    32     Zohair ( 2019 )    311
                                                                                         DT: Decision Tree; NN: Neural Network; SVM: Support Vector Machine; NB: Naive Bayes; RF: Random Forest; LGR: Logistic Regression; LR: Liner Regression; KNN:  LR: Liner Regression; Regression;   Logistic  LGR:  Forest;  RF: Random  Bayes; Naive  NB:  Machine;  Support SVM:  Vector  Network;  NN: Neural  Decision Tree; DT:  Classifcation; Splines:  Support  Vector  SVC:  Boosting;  Gradient  Extreme  XGBoost:  Network;  BN: Bayes  Processing;  Language  NLP: Neural  Neighbours; K-Nearest  Hidden Input-Output  IOHMM: Linear  Discriminant  Analysis;  LDA:  Regression;  RG:  Minimal Optimizer; SMO:  Sequential  Splines;  Regression  Adaptive Multivariate - Addi  Bayesian   BART:  Perceptron; Multi-Layer MLP:    Tree; and  Regression Classifcation   Algorithm; Genetic   GA:  CART:  Bayes; Naive Gaussian  GaNB:   Model; Markov  Trees  Regressive tive

 1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vulnerable students precisely.  students vulnerable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              produced a good quality of resource recommendations for a group  of learners  and the group   for  proposed  recommendations  of resource  a good quality produced  eL_GRS outperformedrecommendation  other classical group strategies.  recommendation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            were likely to fail. The efectiveness of AI techniques were improved after applying the  data after preproc-  applying  improved  were  of AI techniques  The efectiveness  fail.  to  likely were  outperformed  the other essing  and/or algorithms technique  machine  fne-tuning. The support  vector  signifcant way. ones  in a statistically
                                                                                                                                                                                                  the standard algorithms showed improvement in execution time, number of executing generations and  generations  time, number of executing  in execution  improvement the algorithms standard  showed ftness  values.
                                                                                                                                                                                approaches of AIR and FQM . approaches
                                                                                                                                                      during a previous experience using only Scratch (without and 21% higher than recommendation)  the Scratch   using only  experience during  a previous  (without  Scratch). historical teaching  of traditional  results
                                                                                                                                     in which the dropout prevention mechanism was not applied.  not  was  mechanism  the prevention  dropout in  which
                                                                                                                   learning proliferation and motivation. learning  proliferation
                                                                                      with visualization dashboards and feedback, and enhanced the with interaction  at-risk  students. with and feedback,  visualization dashboards
                                                          students.
                                        models  based on academic performance  data  alone.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The results revealed that considering both features of enrolment and course activity aided in identifying  of enrolment  that  considering  both features  revealed The  results
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The results demonstrated that the demonstrated The  results  incorporation  of LSs  the and KLs into  group strategy  recommendation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The results showed that the AI techniques used in this study were able to early identify students who  identify students  early  able to  used in thiswere  study  that the  AI techniques  showed The  results
                                                                                                                                                                                          The results showed improvements of learners’ scores and their satisfaction levels. The comparison  with   levels.  and their scores  satisfaction  of learners’  improvements  showed The  results
                                                                                                                                                                        The results showed that the proposed hybrid recommendation approach outperformed the other two  outperformed  the  other two  that approach  the recommendation  hybrid  proposed  showed The  results
                                                                                                                                               The results confrmed that the pass rate achieved over 52%, which is 8% higher than the rate achieved  is 8% higher than  the achieved  rate  52%, which  over  confrmedThe  results  that  the achieved  pass rate
                                                                                                                             The dropout prediction approach reduced the dropout rate by 14%, compared to previous academic years  academic years  previous  to  14%, compared  by  the rate  reduced  dropout  approach  prediction The  dropout
                                                                                                           The MOOC-Rec system selected learning resources that ft learners’ interests, which helped improve  helped improve  selected learning which  interests,  that resources  system  ft learners’ The  MOOC-Rec
                                                                                                 The proposed recommendation system enhanced the  personalization learning system  recommendation  quality. The  proposed
                                                                               The proposed system achieved early detection of potential at-risk students, gave guidance of students  guidance of students  at-risk of potential  gave  detection  students,  early  achieved  system The  proposed
                                                  Features related to comments were signifcant predictors of fnal grades across open and for-credit  of fnal grades open and for-credit  signifcant predictors  across  comments were  to  related Features
                                Performance of the prediction models that used only ePortfolio data was consistently better than  that better  of  consistently  data  was  ePortfolio  of the models thatPerformance  prediction  used only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rec
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PA
                                                                                                                                                                                          Rec
                                                                                                                                                                        Rec
                                                                                                                                               Rec
                                                                                                                             PD
                                                                                                           Rec
                                                                                                 Rec
                                                                               PD
                                                                    Ass                             on their scores  writing  tasks. efect on the The Criterion® students’  had a positive  system
                                                  PA
                                PD
                 Purpose              Findings
     verview of selected articles RQ3  address  to verview
                 Author
     An  o
      
     4
      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13                    ( 2018 ) Helal et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12                    ( 2015 )  and Bharadwaj Dwivedi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    11                    ( 2017 ) Costa  et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                          10                    Christudas ( 2018 )  et al.
                                                                                                                                                                        9                         ( 2014 ) Chen et al.
                                                                                                                                               8                        ( 2020 )  et al. Cárdenas-Cobo
                                                                                                                             7                        ( 2018 )  et al. Burgos
                                                                                                           6                        Bousbahi and Chorf ( 2015 )
                                                                                                 5                        ( 2017 ) Benhamdi et al.
                                                                               4                        ( 2019 )  et al. Baneres
                                                                    3                         Aluthman  ( 2016 )
                                                  2                         ( 2018 ) Almeda et al.
                                1                         ( 2014 )  et al. Aguiar
     Table       No

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 3
7918                                                                                                                      Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ables did not signifcantly improve the accuracy of predictive models. It was easier to predict closed-  predict  easier to  models. It was  the of predictive  accuracy  improve  signifcantly ables  did not   had a stronger  weeks ended  assignments than previous  open-ended assignments, and data nearest  from  withrelationship  current  grades.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The satisfaction rate was higher in the experimental situation than that achieved without  the  self-adjust-  higher in the  experimental  situation than that was  rate  achieved The  satisfaction ing  capability.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     similar. But asking questions with the AI book was associated with higher retention and correlated associated with higher retention  with the  AI book was  But asking questions similar.  visual representations.  with  viewing positively
                                                                                                                                                                                   the  semester.
                                                                                                                                                          performances and learning experiences, compared to the other two control groups which only used  only  groups  which performances control  and learning the to  compared  other two  experiences,  or videos. textbooks
                                                                                                                                        nifcant features, the number of categories of signifcant features, and Spearman the  number of categories correlation of signifcant features,  coefcient. nifcant  features,
                                                                                                                      mance and the time-dependent variables extracted from LMS were critical factors for prediction.  for  critical  factors  LMS were  from mance  and the extracted  time-dependent variables
                                                                                    variables, performed comparatively well to the other feature sets, and enjoyed the  beneft of being the   and enjoyed  sets,  the to  other feature  well  performedvariables,  comparatively   outperformed methods  model. Decision tree  the models and clusteringsimplest  other prediction  was  models.  prediction  a necessarynot  in developing  step
                                                                  ogy acceptance, as well as improved their achievements in problem solving activities.  solving  in problem  their  achievements  as improved ogy  acceptance,  as well
                                        explaining student satisfaction, while course structure, major, duration, video, interaction, perceived  perceived  video, interaction,  duration,  while course structure,  major,  satisfaction,  student explaining  no signifcant roles.  difculty played  and perceived course  workload
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The use of previous grades can improved the vari-  of the accuracy  prediction  model while forum-related  grades can improved The  use of previous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The experimental results indicated that the generated personalized e-courses satisfed learners’ demands. The  experimental personalized e-courses satisfed learners’  indicated that results  the generated
                                                                                                                                                                            The results proved the predictive models helped the instructor detect students’ academic risk in  earlier  models helped the  instructor students’  the detect  predictive  proved The  results
                                                                                                                                The critical factors that infuenced students’ academic performance classifcation were the  number of sig-  academic performance  classifcation were  that  infuenced students’ The  critical  factors
                                                                                                              The results showed that the early warning system efectively characterized students’ learning  perfor-  characterized students’  efectively  system  warning  that  the  early  showed The  results
                                                                            The results showed that the data set which only had continuous assessment and background information  information  had continuous assessment and background  that only  the  data which  set  showed The  results
                                The results showed that course instructor, content, assessment, and schedule played signifcant roles in  signifcant roles  played  content, assessment, and schedule  that  course instructor,  showed The  results
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rec
                                                                                                                                                                                              Exp                             AI book and E-book were  the used across  learning and pattern gain  of feature  revealed The results
                                                                                                                                                                            PA
                                                                                                                                                  Exp                            learning academic  in better  resulted  history  in the virtual Students’  with 3D avatars  reality  AI-controlled
                                                                                                                                PA
                                                                                                              PA
                                                                            PD
                                                          Ass                            learning attitudes and degree  of technol-  interests,  enhanced students’  extensively  system The proposed
                                PS
                 Purpose              Findings
                 Author
     (continued)
      
     4
      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 23                    ( 2018 )  et al. Moreno-Marcos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22                    ( 2012 ) Li et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                              21                   ( 2020 )  et al. Koć-Januchta
                                                                                                                                                                            20                   ( 2014 )  et al. Jayaprakash
                                                                                                                                                  19                    ( 2017 ) Ijaz et al.
                                                                                                                                18                    ( 2020 ) Huang et al.
                                                                                                              17                    ( 2014 ) Hu et al.
                                                                            16                   ( 2018 )  et al. Howard
                                                          15                   ( 2016 )  et al. Hooshyar
                                14                    ( 2020 )  et al. Hew
     Table       No

 1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                in training small data set size and in producing an acceptable classifcation’s accuracy and reliability  and reliability  accuracy  an acceptable small data size and in producing in  training  classifcation’s  set  rates. test
                                                                                                                                                                                              communicated their problems before the deadline were positively correlated  with  the grades. project  positively  the  deadline were communicated  their before  problems
                                                                                                                                                                            than  60% on average.
                                                                                                                                          tion frequency features were positively correlated  with  academic performance, Internet whereas  positively   trafc  were  features tion  frequency   associated with  academic performance. was  accuracy  The prediction  negatively  were  features volume  increased.  with  the  number of features  improved generally
                                                                                                                        robust and accurate prediction models than prediction  and accurate  the application of base learners. direct robust
                                                                                              marks in small student cohorts in small student marks  with limited attributes very  and that  these  could be useful to  predictions  “at risk.” support potentially  module leaders in identifying students
                                                                    were likely to fail and the machine-learning technique can be used to improve student performance  in  student  improve  can be used to  and the  machine-learning  technique  fail  to  likely were universities.
                                        els for prediction of the students at-risk of the prediction  students  out.  of dropping els  for
                                                                                                                                                                                                        The results proved the efciency of support vector machine and learning algorithms the machine  efciency of support discriminant  analysis  vector  proved The  results
                                                                                                                                                                                      The number of answers provided to others, the number of positive emotion expressions, and how students  students  and how  expressions,  emotion  others,  the to  number of positive  provided The  number of answers
                                                                                                                                                                    The time series neural networks algorithm outperformed a baseline of average past performance by more  more  performance by  past  algorithmThe  time series outperformed a baseline of average  networks  neural
                                                                                                                                  The results indicated that behavior discipline played a vital in academic success. Internet role  connec-  discipline played  indicated thatThe  results  behavior
                                                                                                                The results illustrated the efectiveness of an ensemble stacking generalization approach to build more  build more  to  approach  generalization  of an ensemble stacking  the  efectiveness  illustrated The  results
                                                                                      The results demonstrated the potential for predicting individual student interim individual student  predicting  and fnal assessment  thefor  potential  demonstrated The  results
                                                            The results indicated that the neural-network-based approach achieved early identifcation of students that   identifcation of students  early  achieved  approach  indicated thatThe  results  the  neural-network-based
                                                  Only students’ messages with content related to the subject improved the  classifcation accuracy.  with the to  content related  subject improved  messages  students’ Only
                                The proposed models achieved an accuracy of 84% compared to the baseline of Machine Learning the to  of 84% compared  baseline of Machine  an accuracy  Mod-  models achieved The  proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PA
                                                                                                                                                                                      PA
                                                                                                                                                                    PA
                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                PD
                                                                                      PA
                                                            PD
                                                  PA
                                PD
                 Purpose              Findings
                 Author
     (continued)
      
     4
      
                                                                                                                                                                                                        32                    Zohair ( 2019 )
                                                                                                                                                                                      31                   and Kim ( 2014 ) Yoo
                                                                                                                                                                    30                   ( 2017 )  et al. Yang
                                                                                                                                  29                    ( 2019 )  et al. Xu
                                                                                                                28                    ( 2016 ) Xing et al.
                                                                                      27                   ( 2020 )  et al. Wakelam
                                                            26                    Sukhbaatar ( 2019 )  et al.
                                                  25                    ( 2013b )  et al. Romero
                                24                    ( 2020 )  et al. Mubarak
     Table       No

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 3
7920                                    Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

Acknowledgements   This work is fnancially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China, No. 62177041. 

Declarations 

Confict of interest  There is no confict of interest to declare.

References


* Reviewed articles (n = 32)

* Aguiar, E., Chawla, N. V., Brockman, J., Ambrose, G. A., & Goodrich, V. (2014). Engagement vs per-
    formance: using electronic portfolios to predict frst semester engineering student retention. Journal 
    of Learning Analytics, 1(3), 7–33. https://​doi.​org/​10.​18608/​jla.​2014.​13.3
* Almeda, M. V., Zuech, J., Utz, C., Higgins, G., Reynolds, R., & Baker, R. S. (2018). Comparing the 
    factors that predict completion and grades among for-credit and open/MOOC students in online 
    learning. Online Learning, 22(1), 1–18. https://​doi.​org/​10.​24059/​olj.​v22i1.​1060
* Aluthman, E. S. (2016). The efect of using automated essay evaluation on esl undergraduate students’ 
    writing skill. International Journal of English Linguistics, 6(5), 54. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5539/​ijel.​
    v6n5p​54
Alyahyan, E., & Düştegör, D. (2020). Predicting academic success in higher education: literature review 
    and best practices. In International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education 
    (Vol. 17, Issue 1). Springer. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s41239-​020-​0177-7
Arsovic, B., & Stefanovic, N. (2020). E-learning based on the adaptive learning model:case study in Ser-
    bia. Sadhana-Academy Proceedings in Engineering Sciences, 45(1), 266. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
    s12046-​020-​01499-8.
* Baneres, D., Rodriguez-Gonzalez, E., M., & Serra, M. (2019). An early feedback prediction system for 
    learners at-risk within a frst-year higher education course. IEEE Transactions on Learning Tech-
    nologies, 12(2), 249–263. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TLT.​2019.​29121​67
* Benhamdi, S., Babouri, A., & Chiky, R. (2017). Personalized recommender system for e-Learning 
    environment. Education and Information Technologies, 22(4), 1455–1477. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
    s10639-​016-​9504-y
* Bousbahi, F., & Chorf, H. (2015). MOOC-Rec: A case based recommender system for MOOCs. Proce-
    dia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 195, 1813–1822. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​sbspro.​2015.​06.​395
Breslow, L., Pritchard, D. E., DeBoer, J., Stump, G. S., Ho, A. D., & Seaton, D. T. (2013). Studying 
    learning in the worldwide classroom: Research into edX’s frst MOOC. Research & Practice in 
    Assessment, 8, 13–25. Retrieved from https://​fles.​eric.​ed.​gov/​fullt​ext/​EJ106​2850.​pdf
* Burgos, C., Campanario, M. L., de la Peña, D., Lara, J. A., Lizcano, D., & Martínez, M. A. (2018). 
    Data mining for modeling students’ performance: A tutoring action plan to prevent academic drop-
    out. Computers and Electrical Engineering, 66, 541–556. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​leceng.​
    2017.​03.​005
* Cárdenas-Cobo, J., Puris, A., Novoa-Hernández, P., Galindo, J. A., & Benavides, D. (2020). Recom-
    mender systems and scratch: An integrated approach for enhancing computer programming learn-
    ing. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 13(2), 387–403. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TLT.​
    2019.​29014​57
Castañeda, L., & Selwyn, N. (2018). More than tools? Making sense of the ongoing digitizations of 
    higher education. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 15(22), 
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s41239-​018-​0109-y
Chassignol, M., Khoroshavin, A., Klimova, A., & Bilyatdinova, A. (2018). Artifcial intelligence trends 
    in education: A narrative overview. 7th International Young Scientist Conference on Computational 
    Science. Procedia Computer Science, 136, 16-24

1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925                               7921

Chang, T. Y., & Ke, Y. R. (2013). A personalized e-course composition based on a genetic algorithm with 
    forcing legality in an adaptive learning system. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 
    36(1), 533–542. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jnca.​2012.​04.​002
Chen, C. M. (2008). Intelligent web-based learning system with personalized learning path guidance. 
    Computers & Education, 51(2), 787–814. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​2007.​08.​004
* Chen, W., Niu, Z., Zhao, X., & Li, Y. (2014). A hybrid recommendation algorithm adapted in e-learn-
    ing environments. World Wide Web, 17(2), 271–284. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11280-​012-​0187-z
Chen, X., Xie, H., & Hwang, G. J. (2020a). A multi-perspective study on artifcial intelligence in edu-
    cation: grants, conferences, journals, software tools, institutions, and researchers. Computers and 
    Education: Artifcial Intelligence, 1, 100005. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​caeai.​2020.​100005
Chen, X., Xie, H., Zou, D., & Hwang, G. J. (2020b). Application and theory gaps during the rise 
    of artifcial intelligence in education. Computers and Education: Artifcial Intelligence, 1(July), 
    100002. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​caeai.​2020.​100002
* Christudas, B. C. L., Kirubakaran, E., & Thangaiah, P. R. J. (2018). An evolutionary approach for 
    personalization of content delivery in e-learning systems based on learner behavior forcing com-
    patibility of learning materials. Telematics and Informatics, 35(3), 520–533. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
    1016/j.​tele.​2017.​02.​004
* Costa, E. B., Fonseca, B., Santana, M. A., de Araújo, F. F., & Rego, J. (2017). Evaluating the efec-
    tiveness of educational data mining techniques for early prediction of students’ academic failure 
    in introductory programming courses. Computers in Human Behavior, 73, 247–256. https://​doi.​
    org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2017.​01.​047
Deeva, G., Bogdanova, D., Serral, E., Snoeck, M., & De Weerdt, J. (2021). A review of automated 
    feedback systems for learners: Classifcation framework, challenges and opportunities. Comput-
    ers & Education, 162, 104094. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​2020.​104094
Du Boulay, B. (2000). Can we learn from ITSs? In International conference on intelligent tutoring 
    systems (pp. 9–17). Springer. https://​link.​sprin​ger.​com/​chapt​er/​10.​1007/3-​540-​45108-0_3
* Dwivedi, P., & Bharadwaj, K. K. (2015). E-Learning recommender system for a group of learners 
    based on the unifed learner profle approach. Expert Systems, 32(2), 264–276. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
    1111/​exsy.​12061
Gardner, L., Sheridan, D., & White, D. (2002). A web-based learning and assessment system to sup-
    port fexible education. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 18, 125e136. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
    1046/j.​0266-​4909.​2001.​00220.x
Gartner (2019). Hype cycle for emerging technologies, 2019. Gartner. Retrieved on 2021/1/1 https://​
    www.​gartn​er.​com/​en/​docum​ents/​39560​15/​hype-​cycle-​for-​emerg​ing-​techn​ologi​es-​2019
George, G., & Lal, A. M. (2019). Review of ontology-based recommender systems in e-learning. 
    Computers & Education, 142(July), 103642. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​2019.​103642
Giannakos, M. N., Sharma, K., Pappas, I. O., Kostakos, V., & Velloso, E. (2019). Multimodal data as 
    a means to understand the learning experience. International Journal of Information Manage-
    ment, 48, 108–119. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijinf​omgt.​2019.​02.​003
Godwin, A., & Kirn, A. (2020). Identity‐based motivation: Connections between frst‐year students’ 
    engineering role identities and future‐time perspectives. Journal of Engineering Education, 
    109(3), 362–383. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jee.​20324
Graneheim, U. H., & Lundman, B. (2004). Qualitative content analysis in nursing research: concepts, 
    procedures and measures to achieve trustworthiness. Nurse Education Today, 24(2), 105e112. 
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​nedt.​2003.​10.​001
Guan, C., Mou, J., & Jiang, Z. (2020). Artifcial intelligence innovation in education: A twenty-year 
    data-driven historical analysis. International Journal of Innovation Studies, 4(4), 134–147. 
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijis.​2020.​09.​001
Harasim, L. (2000). Shift happens: Online education as a new paradigm in learning. The Internet and 
    higher education, 3(1–2), 41–61. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S1096-​7516(00)​00032-4
* Helal, S., Li, J., Liu, L., Ebrahimie, E., Dawson, S., Murray, D. J., & Long, Q. (2018). Predict-
    ing academic performance by considering student heterogeneity. Knowledge-Based Systems, 
    161(July), 134–146. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​knosys.​2018.​07.​042
Henly, D. C. (2003). Use of web-based formative assessment to support student learning in a metab-
    olism/nutrition unit. European Journal of Dental Education, 7(3), 116e122. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
    1034/j.​1600-​0579.​2003.​00310.x

                                                                                  1 3
7922                                    Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

* Hew, K. F., Hu, X., Qiao, C., & Tang, Y. (2020). What predicts student satisfaction with MOOCs: A 
    gradient boosting trees supervised machine learning and sentiment analysis approach. Computers 
    & Education, 145, 103724. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​2019.​103724
Hinojo-Lucena, F. J., Aznar-Díaz, I., Cáceres-Reche, M. P., & Romero-Rodríguez, J. M. (2019). Arti-
    fcial intelligence in higher education: A bibliometric study on its impact in the scientifc litera-
    ture. Education Sciences, 9(1), 51. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​educs​ci901​0051
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed cognition: Toward a new foundation for 
    human-computer interaction research. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 
    (TOCHI), 7(2). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​353485.​353487
Holmberg, B. (2005). Theory and practice of distance education. Routledge
Holmes, W., Bialik, M., & Fadel, C. (2019). Artiffcial intelligence in education: Promises and implica-
    tions for teaching and learning. Center for Curriculum Redesign
* Hooshyar, D., Ahmad, R. B., Yousef, M., Fathi, M., Horng, S. J., & Lim, H. (2016). Applying an 
    online game-based formative assessment in a fowchart-based intelligent tutoring system for improv-
    ing problem-solving skills. Computers & Education, 94, 18–36. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​
    2015.​10.​013
* Howard, E., Meehan, M., & Parnell, A. (2018). Contrasting prediction methods for early warning 
    systems at undergraduate level. The Internet and Higher Education, 37, 66–75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
    1016/j.​iheduc.​2018.​02.​001
Hsieh, H. F., & Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative 
    Health Research, 15(9), 1277–1288. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​10497​32305​276687
Hu, Y. H. (2021). Efects and acceptance of precision education in an AI-supported smart learning envi-
    ronment. Education and Information Technologies. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10639-​021-​10664-3
* Hu, Y., Lo, C., & Shih, S. (2014). Developing early warning systems to predict students’ online learn-
    ing performance. Computers in Human Behavior, 36, 469–478. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2014.​
    04.​002
* Huang, A. Y. Q., Lu, O. H. T., Huang, J. C. H., Yin, C. J., & Yang, S. J. H. (2020). Predicting students’ 
    academic performance by using educational big data and learning analytics: evaluation of classifca-
    tion methods and learning logs. Interactive Learning Environments, 28(2), 206–230. https://​doi.​org/​
    10.​1080/​10494​820.​2019.​16360​86
Hwang, G. J., & Tu, Y. F. (2021). Roles and research trends of artifcial intelligence in mathematics edu-
    cation: A bibliometric mapping analysis and systematic review. Mathematics. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
    3390/​math9​060584
Hwang, G. J., Xie, H., Wah, B. W., & Gašević, D. (2020). Vision, challenges, roles and research issues 
    of artifcial intelligence in education. Computers and Education: Artifcial Intelligence, 1, 100001. 
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​caeai.​2020.​100001
* Ijaz, K., Bogdanovych, A., & Trescak, T. (2017). Virtual worlds vs books and videos in history educa-
    tion. Interactive Learning Environments, 25(7), 904–929. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​10494​820.​2016.​
    12250​99
* Jayaprakash, S. M., Moody, E. W., Eitel, J. M., Regan, J. R., & Baron, J. D. (2014). Early alert of aca-
    demically at-risk students: An open source analytics initiative. Journal of Learning Analytics, 1, 
    6–47. https://​doi.​org/​10.​18608/​jla.​2014.​11.3
Kabudi, T., Pappas, I., & Olsen, D. H. (2021). AI-enabled adaptive learning systems: A systematic map-
    ping of the literature. Computers and Education: Artifcial Intelligence, 2, 100017. https://​doi.​org/​
    10.​1016/j.​caeai.​2021.​100017
Kim, J. N., & Grunig, J. E. (2011). Problem solving and communicative action: A situational theory of 
    problem solving. Journal of Communication, 61(1), 120–149. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1460-​2466.​
    2010.​01529.x
* Koć-Januchta, M. M., Schönborn, K. J., Tibell, L. A. E., Chaudhri, V. K., & Heller, H. C. (2020). 
    Engaging with biology by asking questions: Investigating students’ interaction and learning with an 
    artifcial intelligence-enriched textbook. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 58(6), 1190–
    1224. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​07356​33120​921581
Law, N. W. Y. (2019). Human development and augmented intelligence. In The 20th international con-
    ference on artifcial intelligence in education (AIED 2019). Springer. Retrieved on 2021/1/1 from 
    https://​www.​scien​cedir​ect.​com/​scien​ce/​refhub/​S2666-​920X(21)​00014-​undef​ ned/​sref31
* Li, J., Chang, Y., Chu, C., & Tsai, C. (2012). Expert systems with applications a self-adjusting e-course 
    generation process for personalized learning. Expert Systems With Applications, 39(3), 3223–3232. 
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eswa.​2011.​09.​009

1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925                               7923

Liu, M., Kang, J., Zou, W., Lee, H., Pan, Z., & Corliss, S. (2017). Using data to understand how to better 
    design adaptive learning. Technology Knowledge and Learning, 22(3), 271–298. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
    1007/​s10758-​017-​9326-z
Liu, S., Guo, D., Sun, J., Yu, J., & Zhou, D. (2020). MapOnLearn: The use of maps in online learn-
    ing systems for education sustainability. Sustainability, 12(17), 7018. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su121​
    77018
Liz-Domínguez, M., Caeiro-Rodríguez, M., Llamas-Nistal, M., & Mikic-Fonte, F. A. (2019). Systematic 
    literature review of predictive analysis tools in higher education. Applied Sciences (Switzerland), 
    9(24). MDPI AG. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​app92​45569
Lykourentzou, I., Giannoukos, I., Nikolopoulos, V., Mpardis, G., & Loumos, V. (2009). Dropout predic-
    tion in e-learning courses through the combination of machine learning techniques. Computers & 
    Education, 53(3), 950–965. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​2009.​05.​010
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaf, J., Altman, D. G., Prisma Group. (2009). Preferred reporting items for 
    systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. PLoS medicine, 6(7), e1000097. 
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pmed.​10000​97.​t001
Moreno-Marcos, P. M., Muñoz-Merino, P. J., Alario-Hoyos, C., Estévez-Ayres, I., & Delgado Kloos, C. 
    (2018). Analysing the predictive power for anticipating assignment grades in a massive open online 
    course. Behaviour & Information Technology,  37(10–11), 1021–1036. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​
    01449​29X.​2018.​14589​04
Moreno-Marcos, P. M., Alario-Hoyos, C., Munoz-Merino, P. J., & Kloos, C. D. (2019). Prediction in 
    MOOCs: A Review and Future Research Directions. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 
    12(3), 384–401. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TLT.​2018.​28568​08
Moseley, L. G., & Mead, D. M. (2008). Predicting who will drop out of nursing courses: a machine learn-
    ing exercise. Nurse Education Today, 28(4), 469–475. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​nedt.​2007.​07.​012
* Mubarak, A. A., Cao, H., & Zhang, W. (2020). Prediction of students’ early dropout based on their 
    interaction logs in online learning environment. Interactive Learning Environments. https://​doi.​org/​
    10.​1080/​10494​820.​2020.​17275​29
Neuendorf, K. A., & Kumar, A. (2015). Content analysis. The international Encyclopedia of Political 
    Communication, 1-10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​97811​18541​555.​wbiep​c065
Ouyang, F. & Jiao, P. (2021). Artifcial Intelligence in Education: The Three Paradigms. Computers & 
    Education: Artifcial Intelligence, 100020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​caeai.​2021.​100020
Rico-Juan, J. R., Gallego, A. J., & Calvo-Zaragoza, J. (2019). Automatic detection of inconsistencies 
    between numerical scores and textual feedback in peer-assessment processes with machine learning. 
    Computers & Education, 140, 103609. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​2019.​103609
Riedl, M. O. (2019). Human-centered artifcial intelligence and machine learning. Human Behavior and 
    Emerging Technologies, 1(1), 33–36. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​hbe2.​117
Rowe, M. (2019). Shaping our algorithms before they shape us. Artifcial Intelligence and Inclusive Edu-
    cation (pp. 151–163). Springer. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-​981-​13-​8161-4_9
Romero, C., Espejo, P. G., Zafra, A., Romero, J. R., & Ventura, S. (2013). Web usage mining for predict-
    ing fnal marks of students that use Moodle courses. Computer Applications in Engineering Educa-
    tion, 21(1), 135–146. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​cae.​20456
* Romero, C., López, M. I., Luna, J. M., & Ventura, S. (2013). Predicting students’ fnal performance 
    from participation in on-line discussion forums. Computers & Education, 68, 458–472. https://​doi.​
    org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​2013.​06.​009
Selwyn, N. (2016). Is technology good for education? Polity Press. Retrieved on 2021/1/10 from http://​
    au.​wiley.​com/​Wiley​CDA/​Wiley​Title/​produ​ctCd-​07456​96465.​html
Shahiri, A. M., Husain, W., & Rashid, N. A. (2015). A review on predicting student’s performance using 
    data mining techniques. Procedia Computer Science, 72, 414–422. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​procs.​
    2015.​12.​157
Simpson, O. (2018). Supporting students in online, open and distance learning (1st ed.). Routledge
* Sukhbaatar, O., Usagawa, T., & Choimaa, L. (2019). An artifcial neural network based early prediction 
    of failure-prone students in blended learning course. International Journal of Emerging Technolo-
    gies in Learning, 14(19), 77–92. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3991/​ijet.​v14i19.​10366
Tang, K. Y., Chang, C. Y., & Hwang, G. J. (2021). Trends in artifcial intelligence supported e-learning: 
    A systematic review and co-citation network analysis (1998-2019). Interactive Learning Environ-
    ments. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​10494​820.​2021.​18750​01
Tegmark, M. (2017). Life 3.0: Being human in the age of artifcial intelligence. (Knopf)

                                                                                  1 3
7924                                    Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925

Tomasevic, N., Gvozdenovic, N., & Vranes, S. (2020). An overview and comparison of supervised data 
    mining techniques for student exam performance prediction. Computers & Education, 143, 103676. 
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​2019.​103676
Tyler-Smith, K. (2006). Early attrition among frst time eLearners: A review of factors that contribute 
    to drop-out, withdrawal and non-completion rates of adult learners undertaking eLearning pro-
    grammes.  Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 2(2), 73–85. Retrieved  on 2021/1/11 from 
    https://​jolt.​merlot.​org/​docum​ents/​Vol2_​No2_​Tyler​Smith_​000.​pdf
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard Uni-
    versity Press
* Wakelam, E., Jeferies, A., Davey, N., & Sun, Y. (2020). The potential for student performance predic-
    tion in small cohorts with minimal available attributes. British Journal of Educational Technology, 
    51(2), 347–370. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​bjet.​12836
Wohlin, C. (2014). Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a replication in soft-
    ware engineering. In Proceedings of the 18th international conference on evaluation and assess-
    ment in software engineering (pp. 1-10). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​26012​48.​26012​68
Xie, H., Chu, H. C., Hwang, G. J., & Wang, C. C. (2019). Trends and development in technology-
    enhanced adaptive/personalized learning: A systematic review of journal publications from 2007 to 
    2017. Computers & Education, 140, 103599. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​compe​du.​2019.​103599
* Xing, W., Chen, X., Stein, J., & Marcinkowski, M. (2016). Computers in human behavior temporal 
    predication of dropouts in MOOCs: Reaching the low hanging fruit through stacking generalization. 
    Computers in Human Behavior, 58, 119–129. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2015.​12.​007
Xu, W. & Ouyang, F. (2021). A systematic review of AI role in the educational system based on a pro-
    posed conceptual framework. Education and Information Technologies. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
    s10639-​021-​10774-y
* Xu, X., Wang, J., Peng, H., & Wu, R. (2019). Prediction of academic performance associated with 
    internet usage behaviors using machine learning algorithms. Computers in Human Behavior, 
    98(April), 166–173. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chb.​2019.​04.​015
* Yang, T., Brinton, C. G., & Joe-wong, C. (2017). Behavior-based grade prediction for MOOCs via 
    time series neural networks. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 11(5), 716–728. 
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​JSTSP.​2017.​27002​27
Yang, Y. T. C., Gamble, J. H., Hung, Y. W., & Lin, T. Y. (2014). An online adaptive learning environment 
    for critical-thinking-infused English literacy instruction. British Journal of Educational Technology, 
    45(4), 723–747. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​bjet.​12080
Yang, C., Huan, S., & Yang, Y. (2020). A practical teaching mode for collegessupported by Artifcial 
    Intelligence. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning, 15(17), 195–206. https://​
    doi.​org/​10.​3991/​ijet.​v15i17.​16737
* Yoo, J., & Kim, J. (2014). Project performance? Investigating the roles of linguistic features and partici-
    pation patterns. International Journal of Artifcial Intelligence in Education, 24, 8–32. https://​doi.​
    org/​10.​1007/​s40593-​013-​0010-8
Zawacki-Richter, O., Marín, V. I., Bond, M., & Gouverneur, F. (2019). Systematic review of research 
    on artifcial intelligence applications in higher education – where are the educators? Interna-
    tional Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 16(1), 39. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​
    s41239-​019-​0171-0
Zhai, X., Chu, X., Chai, C. S., Siu, M., Jong, Y., Istenic, A. … Li, Y. (2021). A Review of Artifcial Intel-
    ligence (AI) in Education from 2010 to 2020. 2021. Complexity, 8812542. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1155/​
    2021/​88125​42
* Zohair, L. M. (2019). Prediction of student’s performance by modelling small dataset size. Interna-
    tional Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 16(1). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​
    s41239-​019-​0160-3
Zupic, I., & Čater, T. (2015). Bibliometric methods in management and organization. Organizational 
    Research Methods, 18(3), 429–472. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​10944​28114​562629

Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional afliations.


1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:7893–7925                               7925

Authors and Afliations

Fan Ouyang1        · Luyi Zheng1 · Pengcheng Jiao2

* an  OuyangF  
 fanouyang@zju.edu.cn

1  e of Education,Colleg  Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310000, China
2   Ocean College, Zhejiang University, Zhoushan, Zhejiang 316021, China


                                                                                  1 3